= Notes for upmpdcli 0.8 release series

== Minor releases

=== 0.8.5

0.8.4 was skipped.

Release 0.8.5 has no code changes, it only exists because of changes in the
package structure.  The libupnpp library now exists in its own package.

=== 0.8.3

This release mostly has modifications to the control side of the library.

upmpdcli now retries some song delete operations, it seems that mpd
sometimes needs a little time to recover (?)

The control side now uses short timeouts and concurrency to download the
description documents, which should solve the problem of devices
disappearing when a very slow-responding one was present on the network.

Misc improvements to the control side of the lib to support upplay.

=== 0.8.2

- Add capability to set an icon to be displayed when selecting a renderer
  from a control point (see iconpath parameter in configuration file).
- Control side: fix volume control which was not working on many renderers.
- Misc changes to ease compilation on non-glibc platforms.

=== 0.8.1

0.8.1 has many changes in the library code, but almost none of them affect
the device side, they concern support for writing a control-point, which is
mostly disjoint. The following changes are relevant to upmpdcli, and
consistant with a minor release:

-  When used with an non-OpenHome Control Point, multiple calls to
   SetNextTransportURI no longer result in a lengthening of the MPD queue,
   and a wrong playlist.

- The OpenHome Playlist metadata is now writen to a temporary file which
  is then renamed, to avoid partial saves of big lists.

- The AVTransport service uses the OpenHome PlayList metadata cache
  for describing the current track data to a pure AVTransport Control
  Point. This is a very marginal improvement, and only makes sense in case
  the AVTransport CP is used for displaying the current track.

- The OpenHome service was not completly switched off when the option was
  off sometimes resulting in spurious error messages (and nothing more).

- Bad lock management inside the device code could result in a
  semi-deadlock in rare situations. Upmpdcli would then mostly be gone from
  the network, while still doing temporary appearances. This is linked to
  design issues in libupnp, which handles quite badly a situation where a
  subscribed Control Point responds very slowly or not at all to event
  connections.

== Changes in upmpdcli 0.8.0

The main changes in release 0.8 deal with better handling of the OpenHome
playlist, in addition to a number of small bug fixes, and efficiency
improvements.

- OpenHome playlist: metadata from tracks directly added to the MPD queue
  through an MPD client (such as, e.g. MPDroid, gmpc...) is now remembered
  by *upmpdcli* and will be displayed in the UPnP Control Point.

- OpenHome playlist: the metadata for the playlist is now saved to disk so
  that it survives restarts (like the MPD playlist does). The previous
  situation was that the current playing queue was still active after a
  player restart, but no metadata (titles, artists, etc.) was displayed.

- Actually advertise on the network when starting up and dying. An
  oversight in previous versions resulted in the fact that *upmpdcli* could
  only be discovered by a search (when the Control Point started), but,
  when *upmpdcli* was started, it would not appear in a running Control Point
  device list. 

- Do not advertise support for raw PCM strings (audio/Lxx), as we can't
  actually play them. It is better to give accurate information to the
  Control Point, so that it can choose an alternate format such as Wav if
  it is available. 
